republic 1: justice
    1: justice is doing what is legal and honest 
        -what about giving a sword back to it's crazy owner? it is legal and honest but a bad idea 
    2: justice is doing what is good to friends and bad to enemies 
        -but doing bad without paying your dues is bad inherently, and justice must not be so 
        -we might make mistakes judging what is good and bad, which makes us do injustice.
    3: justice is not even legitimate, we are competing against others in life, and justice is used by the powerful to control the weak. 
        -wise men do not compete with each other, similar to how mathematicians do not compete, they all work to achieve more knowledge colletively. This means that only competing with others is not wise, and thus not the correct way to think -> injustice is not wise, and not good. 
        -even tyrants require some justice to run their societies. this is because for any group to function, they must adhere by at least some rules they give themselves. 
        -justice is good for the soul, which is another reason to strive for it 

republic 2: parts of the city 
    the ring that makes you invisible will corrupt you -> power should be given to people ruled by reason 

    cities are like bodies, each part has a function that the others cannot do. 
        eyes see things, hands grab things. eyes cannot grab and hands cannot see 
    people should do their function 

    G: sounds like a city of pigs. no advancement or ambition, we just live and die. people will always want luxury on top of basic needs. 

    Socrates: with surplus supplies, classes develop and luxury items start existing. A heirarchy develops.

republic 4: classes of the city 
    Like a city, a soul must have these parts: the part that rules, the part that secures, and hte part that provides 
    rulers ruled by reason 
        -reason above emotions 
        -we would not want to be ruled by someone who is not ruled by reason 
    warriors ruled by spirit
        -motivation from an honorable source.
        -regardless of knowing what is right, believes they are doing what is right
    providers ruled by appetite
        -wants external rewards like food and comforts and stuff 


republic 6: intelligible things 
    republic 5 (short footnote) 
        Parm: we have knowledge, but we can misuse it 
        if something changes/becomes, does it come out of nothing or something? 
            can we even concieve of nothingness? we cant, because we think of something so things come from something. 
            but then becoming = being 

        -knowledge: domain of being 
        -opinion: domain of appearances 
        -ignorance: domain of non-being 

        domain of appearances = the wandering intermediate 
            our opinions can change like appearances can change. 
            appearances can be accurate or inaccurate, like our opinions 
        illusion we have knowledge = opinion from appearances 

        line allegory: perception, belief, thought, instant understanding like an epiphany 
                       ekasia,     pistis, dianoia, noesis
    
    Soc: people should have philosophers rule, but many think the sophists are philosophers.
        a sophist is like a person who has a beast. the sophist thinks what pleases the beast is good and what angers it is bad.
        the sophist calls that wisdom, but in reality is fucking stupid.

    the sun analogy 
        -eyes can see, world can be seen. 
        -but there is also a third thing, light which lets eyes see things that can be seen.
        -light makes sensible things visible to eyes
            light comes from the sun 
        -the mind can understand, intellible things can be understood 
            understanding comes from the Good 
        -the Good makes intelligible things available to our minds 
            the Good is like the sun for our minds 
        -when the soul does not have Good in it, it can't understand intelligible things
            like how eyes cannot see without light 
        -reason we can't think about the good is the same resaon we can't look at the sun with our eyes 

Republic 7: the cave
    Soc: lack of education is similar to living in a cave
        they are restrained 
        there is a fire behind and above them 
            it casts light on the wall in front of them 
        there are shadows of things in front of the fire 
        they think the shadows are the truth bc it is all they can see 

        when their restraints are removed, they are compelled to stand up 
        if someone tries to show them the source of light, the light hurts their eyes and they are scared of it
            -show source of light = education 
        this effect is intensified when they are brought outside into sunlight, which is much stronger than fire light  
            -sunlight = forms, the ultimate truth 
            -because we do not want to look at the source of the light, there must be something in us that does not want to be educated 
        
        there is no "being" in the cave, only appearances 

    get away from sensible realm: get into mathematics -> math, geometry, astronomy 
        astronomy: we should not be fooled into thinking we are studying movement of planets and stars 
        we are studying the principles of how they move 
    Pythagoreans: think if we study enough math, we can hear the music in planetary movements and stuff. All of it is just math and numbers. 

Republic 8: cycle of forms of government 
    each form of gov is destroyed and replaced by a new one bc of youth 

    1: aristocracy ruled by philosophers 
        values wisdom 
        the youth grow up in peace and justice 
        it falls because 
            -the youth think it will last forever 
            -they want honor and to be honored 
    
    2: themocracy ruled by the honored 
        values courage 
        honor comes from conquest and courage 
        it falls because 
            -they make enemies in their pursuit of honor 
            -the enemies eventually defeat them through their force of wealth 
            -the youth watch their honored parents fall due to money and learn the power of money 
    
    3: oligarchy ruled by the rich 
        values a superficial moderation 
        the top benefits from the bottom producing things  
        it falls because 
            -the youth are raised very wealthy and thinks there is a price to be paid for the wealth 
            -eventually the commoners realize the oligarchs are no better than them and establish a new government by the commoners 

    4: democracy ruled by the common people 
        values social justice 
        no longer cares much for moderation 
        everyone is free to do what they want to do 
        it falls because 
            -all that matters is one's own will 
            -people realize their freedom has no structure/meaning 
            -when one asserts will over everyone, becomes tyranny 

    5: tyranny
        values: ? maybe practical wisdom 
        it falls because 
            -people philosophize in secret 
            -create an aristocracy as people are more and more people are discontent with the tyrant, starts following new philosophers 

republic 9: why being a tyrant sucks ass 
    everyone in a society imitates the society's structure 
        people in society ruled by money will want more money 
    thus everyone in a tyranny will want to be tyrants themselves 
        they are little tyrants, being tyrannous to the people below them 
        wants to be the tyrant to those above as well 
    tyrants have no true friends, they can only sway crowds, not make true friends 
    because tyrants become tyrants through convincing people to betray their old leaders, it makes the people vicious
        betraying a second time is easier than betraying once 
        followers are vicious to each other as well 
    
    how to make a better society: make sure they are ruled by the best person 
    the best person = a philosopher 
    the philosopher is ruled by the divine, the Good. 
    genuine commitment to justice = submission to rationality 
    democracy is only a good form of government when the poeple are virtuous 
        virtue through the Good, but if they are ruled by the Good, they are basically in an aristocracy anyway 